---
title: A Simple Finite State Machine in Python
tags: [FSM, python]
categories: [python]
---


# A simple Finite State Machine in Python

Wikipedia definition summarizes it best. A Finite State Machine (FSM) is an abstract machine that 
can be in exactly one of a finite number of states at any given time. 
The FSM moves from one state to another, also called a transition, in response to an event. There 
can be only a predetermined number of transitions and events defined during the conception of the 
FSM. 

FSM is a very simple paradigm that can be applied easily to any kind of situations. The turnstile 
that filters the people at the entrance of the museum, traffic lights or even network protocols. 
The subject is so vast that it has its own field of research: Automata Theory.

FSM are very easy to implement and it makes the perfect toy project for a weekend.

## **How does it work?**

The first step is to declare your states, events, and transitions. Each element has its own class.

``` python
class State:
    """ definition of an FSM state """

class Event:
    """ definition of an FSM event """

class Transition:
    """ definition of an FSM transition """
```

Next, you will need to instantiate the main class. To work, this class needs 3 important things:

- The transitions you defined in the first step
- A user queue to communicate between the FSM and the client
- A user callback that is added to the queue every time an event is triggered

``` python
# user queue
user_queue = queue.Queue()

# user callback
def user_callback(action):
    pass

[...]

# define FSM
myFSM = FSM()
myFSM.setup(user_callback, user_queue)
myFSM.add(transitions)
```

The second step is to start the FSM. It is an error if no initial states are present in the FSM. 
All errors are based on a generic exception and raised accordingly.

``` python
class FSMError(Exception):
    """ generic Exception for the FSM """
```

The last step occurs in the client. Depending on the event, the client updates the FSM using the 
“update” function.

## **But wait, there is more...**

If you have only few states and transitions, it is fine to define them inside your client. It is only a 
few lines of code. But when the number starts to grow, it becomes a nightmare to maintain and 
update. So, we get you covered.

Along with the normal way, the library is built with the availability to create a FSM from a YAML definition.

``` python
class FSMBuilder:
    """ Build a FSM from a YAML definition file """
```

You define everything from the comfort of your editor, call the proper class, add the user queue 
and callback and voila! In no time your FSM is up and ready.

``` yaml
Events:
  - E.OFF
  - E.ON
[...]
States:
  - name: S.OFF
    type: BEGIN
    enter: "off"
    exit: ""
[...]
Transitions:
  - event: E.ON
    begin: S.OFF
    end: S.ON
```

However, you still have to implement the logic behind every event, but at least the creation is 
automatic.

## **Where can you find it?**

The library is available on the [GitHub](https://github.com/oaxley/pyfsm) repository 

On the GitHub repository, we added two examples. One with the creation of an FSM inside the 
client and the other one from a YAML file.
They both simulate the same NavCom like the Bendix/King 
[KY196](http://avionicsmasters.com/avionics/comms/bendix-king-ky-196.html).
