---
title: The 10 most common use cases of OpenSSL
tags: [security, openssl]
---
# The 10 most common use cases of OpenSSL

In our modern world, where privacy is attacked on all front, becoming proficient in OpenSSL is a
necessity. But tackling the beast alone is a daunting task prone to errors.
To help you in your journey, here are the 10 most common use cases of OpenSSL.

## **1. Generates a private and public keys**

The first step of any asymmetric encryption is the generation of a private and public key.
The private key should remain in your possession at all time because it is used for:

- Generating a public key
- Decrypting documents
- Signing documents

To generate a private key, you need to chain two OpenSSL commands:

```bash
openssl genpkey \
        -algorithm RSA \
        -pkeyopt rsa_keygen_bits:2048 | \
openssl pkcs8 \
        -topk8 \
        -v2 des3 \
        -out private.pem
```

The first command builds a RSA 2048 bits private key while the second builds an armor around it
with a triple DES encryption and a password.

Then you can retrieve the associated public key:

```bash
openssl pkey -in private.pem -pubout -out public.pem
```

Only this public key can be published to all your contacts, third parties or key stores.

## **2. Encrypting a document**

To encrypt a document, you need the public key of the receiver.
Once you have it, you can easily encrypt a document:

```bash
openssl pkeyutl \
        -encrypt \
        -pubin -inkey public.pem \
        -in clear.txt \
        -out encrypt.dat
```

## **3. Decrypting a document**

If a document is encrypted with your public key, you need to use your private key to decrypt it:

```bash
openssl pkeyutl \
        -decrypt \
        -inkey private.pem \
        -in encrypt.dat \
        -out decrypt.txt
```

## **4. Signing a document**

Building a signature informs the receiver that you are effectively the owner of the document. It
also ensures the other person that the document has not been tampered during the transmission.

```bash
openssl pkeyutl \
        -sign \
        -inkey private.pem \
        -in clear.txt \
        -out signature
```

## **5. Verifying a document**

To verify the ownership of a document, you need the public key of the sender as well as the
signature and the document itself.

```bash
openssl pkeyutl \
       -verify \
       -pubin -inkey public.pem \
       -sigfile signature \
       -in clear_txt
```

---

The following use cases deal with the generation of certificates to secure communications between
servers.

## **6. Generates a self-signed certificates for HTTPS**

To activate HTTPS on your Apache or NGinx server, you will need a certificate as well as a key:

```bash
openssl req -x509 \
        -newkey rsa:4096 \
        -nodes -days 365 \
        -out server_cert.pem \
        -keyout server_key.pem
```

Your browser or the third party application like cURL might complain when connecting to your
website. That’s perfectly normal. Your certificate has not been verified by a Trust Certification
Authority such as Comodo or DigiCert.

## **7. Generates a self-signed root certificate**

A root certificate is used to validate a server certificate (as above). The internet root
certificates are usually hold by Certification Authority but in the perimeter of your own network
or company, you can be your own root certificate.

First you create a private key root_key.pem (see 1) and then you generate a root certificate
(root_ca.pem) signed with your private key:

```bash
openssl req -x509 \
        -new -nodes -days 365 \
        -key root_key.pem \
        -out root_ca.pem
```

The generation process will ask a couple of questions. The one you need to take care of are the
“Organizational Name” and the “Common Name”. These two values help verify to whom the certificate
has been issued to.

Once done, you can install the certificate root_ca.pem in every computers or devices that will
need to verify your servers certificates.
In Firefox, it’s in the Preferences > Privacy & Security > View Certificates > Authorities > Import

## **8. Signs a server certificate with your root certificate**

This time, you need to create a private key server_key.pem for your server (see 1) and then you
need to establish a Certificate Signing Request:

openssl req -new -key server_key.pem -out server.csr

Again, the request will ask for some questions. This time, the “Common Name” should be either the
Full Qualified Domain Name (FQDN) of your server or your domain, as such my.website.org or
*.domain.net.

On the last step, you use the root certificate to sign the server certificate:

```bash
openssl x509 -req -days 365\
        -CA root_ca.pem \
        -CAkey root_private.pem \
        -CAcreateserial \
        -in server.csr \
        -out server_cert.pem
```

As a result, the files server_key.pem and server_cert.pem can now be used with your Apache/NGinx
web server.

## **9. Testing a SSL connection to a server**

If you just need to test a connection to a server then there is no need to create keys,
certificates or even a line of code. You can simply use OpenSSL:

```bash
openssl s_client -connect yourservername:port
```

The client will return the server certificate and what kind of cipher is supported by the other end.

## **10. Testing a SSL client**

At the opposite, if you have a SSL client you need to test but don’t want to go all the way to
build a server, you can also use OpenSSL:

```bash
openssl s_server \
        -key server_key.pem \
        -cert server_cert.pem \
        -accept 4430 \
        -www
```

You will need a certificate and a key to start the server but you can use the previous recipes
for that.

---

That’s it. The 10 most common use cases of OpenSSL. You should have now enough knowledge to start
your journey in securing your communications on Internet.
