---
title: Semantic Versioning for Python
tags: [python, semver]
---
# Semantic Versioning for Python

In Software Development, versioning is a practice to track changes in the source code.
Unfortunately, as time goes, it is not uncommon to have multiple versions of the same software
in production. Therefore, it’s important to adopt early a good strategy that sticks. Today, we
will experience with the Semantic Versioning (SemVer) with a focus on Python.

## **Presentation**

SemVer defines 5 fields and a set of rules for each of them that developers should adhere to in
order to be compliant.

- Major: the major version number for your software
- Minor: the minor version
- Patch: the patch version
- Pre-Release: the pre-release value (any string)
- Build: the build value (any string)

The last two are optional and may not be present at all time. The first three fields always start
at 0. Moreover, to represent a Semantic Version we must concatenate all the fields with specific
separators:

```
String format: <major>.<minor>.<patch>[-pre_release][+build]
examples: 1.0.0, 1.0.0-alpha, 1.0.0+20200101T1100, 1.0.0-alpha+20200101T1100
```

The main rules are:

- Patch increments when the new code corrects a bug
- Minor increments when new functionalities that do not break backwards compatibility are added
  to the code. Patch is set to 0.
- Major increments when we insert breaking changes in the code. Both Minor and Patch are reset to 0.

With these rules, you have the following precedence:

```
1.0.0 < 1.1.0 < 1.1.1 < 2.0.0
```

More rules are available on the website https://semver.org.

## **The Python module**

Our Python module helps you benefit from the Semantic Versioning in your code. The number of
functionalities is limited to maintain above all a small memory footprint.

- Parsing any string version and build a Semantic Versioning object
- Create a Python representation so that it can be rebuild as an object later on
- Get a string representation of the object
- Compare different Semantic Versioning object according to the rules edited on the SemVer
  website.

## **Installation**

The first step is to install the module with pip:

```bash
pip install pySemVer
```

## **Usage**

The two methods to instantiate the class, is first with the constructor by specifying the
parameters (pre_release and build parameters are optionals):

```python
>>> a = SemanticVersion(major=1, minor=2, patch=3)
>>> b = SemanticVersion(major=1, minor=2, patch=3, pre_release="alpha", build="2345)
```

The second method parses a version string and create an object from it:

```python
>>> c = SemanticVersion.parse("1.2.3-alpha+2345")
```

String representation is available easily with the “str” method:

```python
>>> str(c)
'1.2.3-alpha+2345'
```

as well as the Python representation with “repr”:

```python
>>> repr(c)
‘SemanticVersion(major=1, minor=2, patch=3, pre_release=”alpha”, build=”2345”)’
```

Building version from strings is nice, but it’s better if we can compare two versions.
The SemanticVersion object supports comparisons thanks to the Python rich operators.

This gives the opportunity to compare versions according to Semantic Versioning rules:

```python
>>> a = SemanticVersion(major=1,minor=2,patch=0)
>>> b = SemanticVersion(major=1,minor=3,patch=0)
>>> a > b
False
>>> a != b
True
>>> a == b
False
>>> c = SemanticVersion(major=1,minor=3,patch=0,pre_release="alpha")
>>> c > a
True
>>> c > b
False
```

## **Final words**

The source code is available on [GitHub](https://github.com/oaxley/pySemVer).
