---
title: Nonce-sense: Randomness in Cryptography
tags: [security, python]
---

# Nonce : definition

A "nonce," short for "number used once," is a cryptographic term referring to a random or pseudo-random number that is generated for a specific purpose, typically as part of a cryptographic protocol. 

The primary function of a nonce is to ensure the uniqueness of a cryptographic communication, preventing replay attacks and other forms of unauthorized access.

## Attributes

A nonce to be secured, should have the following attributes:

- **Uniqueness**: The nonce is generated to be unique for each execution of a cryptographic operation. This uniqueness is crucial to prevent attackers from reusing intercepted data or messages to compromise the security of the system.
- **Randomness**: Nonces are typically generated using random or pseudo-random number generators to ensure unpredictability. This randomness makes it difficult for attackers to predict or guess the nonce value, further enhancing security.
- **Timestamps**: Sometimes, nonces are combined with timestamps to further enhance uniqueness. This combination ensures that even if two nonces are generated at the same time, they will still be distinct due to differences in timestamp values.
- **Temporary Nature**: Nonces are typically short-lived and are only valid for a limited time or a single use. Once used, they are discarded to maintain security.

In essence, nonces play a crucial role in maintaining the security and integrity of cryptographic communications by ensuring uniqueness and preventing unauthorized access.  
Their random or pseudo-random nature makes them resistant to attacks, enhancing the overall security of the system.

## Flow

Both the server and the client share a secret password.

1. The server will issue a nonce and send it to the client
2. Upon reception, the client will perform some operation with both the password and the nonce
3. The server performs the same operation than the client
4. The client send back the result to the server
5. The server compares its result with the one from the client. If they match, the communication can continue.

## Python Code Example

### Parts

For the common secret, we can use the UUID library:

``` python
import uuid

# the secret key is based from a FQDN
secret_key = str(uuid.uuid3(uuid.NAMESPACE_DNS, "com.acme.secret"))
```

Then generating the nonce is trivial:

``` python
def nonce():
    # generate a random bytes string the size of the secret key
    # this will simplify the hashing
    return os.urandom(len(secret_key))
```

The hashing algorithm should be consistent between the server and the client.  
A XOR operation between the secret and the nonce is a good start.

``` python
def generate_hash(secret_key, nonce):
    # XOR the secret_key and the nonce
    msg = ''.join(chr(ord(k) ^ c) for k,c in zip(secret_key, cycle(nonce)))

    # create a SHA1 from the msg
    return hashlib.sha1(msg.encode()).hexdigest()
```

### Whole script

``` python
import os, uuid, hashlib
from itertools import cycle

# ----- globals

# the secret key is based from a FQDN
secret_key = str(uuid.uuid3(uuid.NAMESPACE_DNS, "com.acme.secret"))

# ----- functions

def nonce():
    # generate a random bytes string the size of the secret key
    # this will simplify the hashing
    return os.urandom(len(secret_key))

def generate_hash(secret_key, nonce):
    # XOR the secret_key and the nonce
    msg = ''.join(chr(ord(k) ^ c) for k,c in zip(secret_key, cycle(nonce)))

    # create a SHA1 from the msg
    return hashlib.sha1(msg.encode()).hexdigest()

# ----- begin

# generate the nonce
nonce = nonce()

# send the nonce to the client
print("Nonce sent to client:", nonce)

# simulate the client computation and response 
client_response = generate_hash(secret_key, nonce)
print("Hashed nonce received from the client:", client_response)

# simulate the server own computation
server_value = generate_hash(secret_key, nonce)

# verified that both matches
if server_value == client_response:
    print("Nonce verified! Authentication successful.")
else:
    print("Authentication failed!")
```

## Conclusion

This is a basic example of how a nonce might be used in an authentication scenario. In real-world applications, the implementation would be more complex and involve additional security measures.
